I've been using Vim for 20 years, and my primary work project has over 10,000 files in it so I feel like I have a different perspective on this. You don't need a file explorer at all and using one can hamstring your journey in learning to use Vim efficiently. When you're navigating, you're usually trying to either answer a question "What file has this symbol, what files are part of this driver, what files have cpio in their name or end in .py" or switch between a working set of files which is a subset of all the files. This is very true when you are working on a big project.

For answering questions, if you want to see which files are relative to the cwd, you can press tab after :e. If you want to jump to a header, put your cursor on it and press gf. In the Linux kernel I have path+=include,include/uapi,arch/x86/include which makes this work on any header in the project. If you looking for a symbol use g] or tags or neovim's built in LSP support. :grep will fill the quickfix list, which should be your #1 tool when picking between a set of files based on criteria.

For working set, the buffer list is your friend. Type :b and type the first letter of a file and hit tab. If you want a stricter workingset, add files to the arglist. Another underlooked feature is the build in bookmark system. When I am working on a feature that spans a dozen directories, I mark every relevant file which makes each file a keypress. And then there's my most used keypress, Ctrl-^ which switches you between your current and previous file. So many hours are spent just doing this while programming (header and implementation file, code and test file, comparing old/new versions of something) that its paramount to learn to use it.

In conclusion, LSP and fuzzy finding in my opinion really completes and updates the vim experience by supercharging how you normally do things in vim, but I believe file explorers are usually antithetical. Learn how to navigate without a file explorer and you likely will never miss it AND You will build techniques to work with projects where a file explorer is impractical.

The key thing to remember is that 99% of the time what you care about is what is IN the files and you can learn how to navigate in a project where every file has an obfuscated name or a nonsensical layout if you can follow the code itself.
